Welcome back.
This video kicks off a series of videos that all focus on list methods.
So Python comes with a bunch of these built in methods that are particular to lists that allow us to
do things like sort a list or split it in half or add a new item to the end or duplicate a list.
All these different things that we can do.
And there's just so many I decided to split them up into a couple of bite sized videos.
But the first thing I want to address is the difference between functions and methods.
They're both very very similar.
A method is just a type of a function.
But there is a significant distinction.
So we've been using built in functions like print you know print 1 plus three or Eliane which just a
pet peeve of mine.
I hate that it's just L-E and instead of length I don't know why that decision was made.
Why don't we do PR guy instead of print.
You just type the whole word something along anyways.
We've been using one and that is not particular to list.
We could use it on a string like this and it gives us the length of that string or we can pass in a
list as well a single item list and it tells us the length of that is 1.
So unlike these built in functions like print and Lenn the functions we're going to see in this video
and the next couple of videos are specific to the lists and the way we actually use them the way we
access them is by adding a dot to the end of the name of a list.
So we can have a list called data like this and we would access a list method by writing data dot whatever
the method name is append that sort.
So everything we learn in these next few videos will be something coming after a list and it doesn't
have to be a variable name.
You could do it directly on the list as well but it has to be an instance of a list.
We'll spend a lot more time talking about functions and methods later on when we actually cover them.
But this is just one of those instances where I needed to do a little bit of explaining just to make
sure that we are clear functions and methods are not exactly the same thing.
They're not entirely interchangeable.
OK so boils down to the fact that when we have a function and it's attached to a particular object in
this case a list it becomes a list method.
If we have a function floating on its own like print or L.N. it's just a function.
Ok enough of that stuff.
We'll get back to it later on.
Let's take a look at some of these list methods.
So the first three we're going to talk about this video all have to do with adding data to a list.
And the first one is called append and it will add an item whatever we pass in to the end of the list.
So here's an example I have first list is equal to the list 1 2 3 4.
And if I write first list append because it's a method on the list pass in five it changes first just
to now have 5 at the end.
So if we test it out I have this data list already.
One two three and I could do data append and let's add in purple of course.
Now if we look at data the list is 1 2 3 purple.
So the fourth item is now purple.
So that's pretty much it to append.
It's a method unless we have to use dot after the name of the list and it always adds to the end of
the list so that's significant as well.
You might be wondering what if I have multiple things I want to append like I want to add in two numbers.
Let's say I want to add in seven and nine.
Well you cannot do seven common nine if you try it says.
Append takes exactly one argument and I gave two.
So yeah no I'm not doing that for you.
What Python says.
Fortunately extend is to the rescue so extend will at the end of the list all of the values that we
pass into it.
So here's an example where we have this first list and we try to append multiple items.
It does not work or if we tried to pass in another list it actually just attaches the list to the end
as a single item.
It's nested inside.
But if we do it the correct way using extend it looks like this.
So we have our first variable correct list equals 1 2 3 4 in the list.
If we call that extend on that and we pass in a list a single list 5 6 7 8 it will take the items in
this list and add them each to the end.
So it doesn't just throw in the entire list as one item it adds them individually.
So let's try that.
I'll make a simple list and I'll just call it numbs.
Equals 1 to 3.
So the length of numb right now or Nom's is three.
If I did that append and I give it a list of four comma five what is the length of number at this point.
It's only four.
And that's because Nom's has one item to item 3 Item four.
This is one item.
It's takes up the fourth spot or it technically index of three.
But if we use numskulls extend it instead and we do the same thing for come five this time.
If we look at numbers it's now an even one level less so there is no nested list going on.
So it just goes through the list and individually adds them in.
And if we did length again we would see this time that length.
That's five.
So to summarize if you're adding one item to the end of a list use append if you need to add more than
one item to the end of the list.
Use extend both of these are great but they only add to the end of a list.
What if we want to add somewhere else in the middle or at the beginning of a list.
Well thankfully we have insert so insert does just that we tell it where to insert something using a
numeric index and then we tell it what to answer.
So here's an example we have first list.
Once again it's one two three four in a list and then we call the insert method on that list and the
first thing we provide is the index we want to add the new data to.
So that is two.
In this case so 0 1 2.
So it should be right here at this spot.
And what we want to add the string high so our result is 1 too high 3 4.
So it's the index remember starts counting at 0 2 0 1 2.
We can also use negative numbers along with insert but it might not work exactly the way you anticipate
because when we do negative one if we ask for the negative one item the negative first item of this
list it would give us four.
But in this case it's going to calculate the index based off of the existing list before this is inserted.
So this list is 0 1 2 3 4.
The last index is 4.
Also the item itself has four which is confusing but this is the fourth position.
So when we access negative one we say insert this at the last position.
It's going to figure out on the old version of the list.
That means four index four.
And so it adds the end to index four which really means 0 1 2 3 4.
And it's not actually accounting for the fact that the list grows by 1.
So it doesn't get to the very end it will add it to the second to last thing if you want something to
be inserted at the very very end.
What you could do is this if we had numbers he 1 2 3 4 I could do Gnome's dot insert.
And if I didn't know how long the list I could just use append.
But if you wanted to use Insert and you didn't know how long the list is you can do Lenn of Nom's comma
last or whatever you want to insert.
So this is going to calculate the length of it.
And if we look at numbers now it shows up last I wouldn't focus on it too much but I just wanted to
point out that it may not work exactly the way you expect but otherwise it's pretty straightforward.
You give it the index you want and then the piece of data to insert.
And if you're trying to add something to the end then just use append.
OK so let's wrap all of that up.
We learned three methods.
The first append will add a single item to the end of a list and then we have extend which will add
multiple items to the end of the list only.
And then finally insert if you need to add an item anywhere else that isn't the end.
You can use Insert.
Cool.
So next up we'll focus on deleting things from our list.
A couple of methods to do that.